---
title: 'Commentary on College Sports'
date: 2024-04-30
permalink: /posts/2014/08/blog-post-3/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

I’m currently reading “Drive” by Daniel Pink, which is a book about motivation and the management mismatch between scientific literature and the business world. I have enjoyed it as a lens to evaluate my many bosses, teachers, and coaches as well as learn for myself the best way to motivate and lead people. Fundamentally too, the book has forced me to self-reflect on what motivates me and how I should approach the goals I’m striving for. 

While I’m not done with the book yet, one thing it got me thinking about was college sports unionization. The Dartmouth Men’s Basketball team had voted recently in March 2024 to join a labor union, calling for college “amateurism to end.” The current state of the NCAA allows college athletes to profit from name, image, and likeness contracts but forbids pay-to-play salaries from their schools. 

(Update: On May 23rd, the NCAA Board of Governors approved a settlement in the House vs. NCAA case that includes ~$2.8 billion in backpay for athletes and a revenue-sharing model between schools and athletes. This settlement essentially ends amateurism).

While I sympathize with athletes who put their bodies on the line while the NCAA profits massively from college sports, I have concerns about the social, logistical, and legal ramifications of ending amateurism. To narrow the discussion, I wanted to use “Drive” as a comment on the psychological ramifications of this debate. 

Pink discusses the carrot and stick phenomenon: the widely accepted belief that rewarding activity will get you more of it (carrot) while punishing an activity will get you less of it (stick). He discusses literature leading to many conclusions about how carrots and sticks can extinguish intrinsic motivation, diminish performance, crush creativity, encourage cheating, and foster short-term thinking. Pink acknowledges how this phenomenon occurs in creativity-driven tasks as opposed to more repetitive tasks, and I think sports fits in some middle ground on this spectrum where Pink’s book still can apply. 

I believe there are unintended psychological ramifications that will arise if a pay-to-play system were to become the norm in college sports. Increasing extrinsic motivators like money can threaten the feelings of control in athletes, as their coach or institution has more means of influence over them. Imagine how a streak of poor performance may lead to a pay cut, which could lead to lower self-worth and/or a lesser enjoyment of the game. Maybe in other cases, it could motivate an athlete to hustle and work harder, but how sustainable would that be, especially when the results aren’t showing? In many cases, I feel paying college athletes would exacerbate the psychological problems of athletes buying into “athlete-student” instead of a “student-athlete.” It adds a complicated layer to student-athletes' feelings of self-worth, increased stress and pressure to perform, and post-athletics identity crisis. 

In the end, it feels like the many ways ending amateurism could play out will lead to less overall involvement of people in college athletics, from roster limits to quitting athletes. It would sadden me to see a college sports paradigm where playing for the love of a sport is replaced by the need to make a buck.
